Let us imagine to ourselves
a world only peopled with beings of no thickness, and
suppose these “infinitely flat” animals are all in one and
the same plane, from which they cannot emerge. Let us
further admit that this world is sufficiently distant from
other worlds to be withdrawn from their influence, and
while we are making these hypotheses it will not cost
us much to endow these beings with reasoning power,
and to believe them capable of making a geometry. In
that case they will certainly attribute to space only two
dimensions. But now suppose that these imaginary animals, while remaining without thickness, have the form
of a spherical, and not of a plane figure, and are all on
the same sphere, from which they cannot escape. What
kind of a geometry will they construct? In the first place,
it is clear that they will attribute to space only two dimensions. The straight line to them will be the shortest
distance from one point on the sphere to another—that
is to say, an arc of a great circle. In a word, their geometry will be spherical geometry. What they will call
space will be the sphere on which they are confined, and
on which take place all the phenomena with which they
are acquainted. Their space will therefore be unbounded, since on a sphere one may always walk forward without
ever being brought to a stop, and yet it will be finite;
the end will never be found, but the complete tour can
be made. Well, Riemann’s geometry is spherical geometry extended to three dimensions. To construct it, the
German mathematician had first of all to throw overboard, not only Euclid’s postulate but also the first axiom that only one line can pass through two points. On
a sphere, through two given points, we can in general
draw only one great circle which, as we have just seen,
would be to our imaginary beings a straight line. But
there was one exception. If the two given points are at
the ends of a diameter, an infinite number of great circles
can be drawn through them. In the same way, in Riemann’s geometry—at least in one of its forms—through
two points only one straight line can in general be drawn,
but there are exceptional cases in which through two
points an infinite number of straight lines can be drawn.
So there is a kind of opposition between the geometries
of Riemann and Lobatschewsky. For instance, the sum
of the angles of a triangle is equal to two right angles
in Euclid’s geometry, less than two right angles in that
of Lobatschewsky, and greater than two right angles in
that of Riemann. The number of parallel lines that can be drawn through a given point to a given line is one
in Euclid’s geometry, none in Riemann’s, and an infinite
number in the geometry of Lobatschewsky. Let us add
that Riemann’s space is finite, although unbounded in
the sense which we have above attached to these words.
Surfaces with Constant Curvature.—One objection,
however, remains possible. There is no contradiction between the theorems of Lobatschewsky and Riemann; but
however numerous are the other consequences that these
geometers have deduced from their hypotheses, they had
to arrest their course before they exhausted them all, for
the number would be infinite; and who can say that if
they had carried their deductions further they would not
have eventually reached some contradiction? This difficulty does not exist for Riemann’s geometry, provided
it is limited to two dimensions. As we have seen, the
two-dimensional geometry of Riemann, in fact, does not
differ from spherical geometry, which is only a branch
of ordinary geometry, and is therefore outside all contradiction. Beltrami, by showing that Lobatschewsky’s
two-dimensional geometry was only a branch of ordinary
geometry, has equally refuted the objection as far as it
is concerned. This is the course of his argument: Let us
consider any figure whatever on a surface. Imagine this figure to be traced on a flexible and inextensible canvas
applied to the surface, in such a way that when the canvas
is displaced and deformed the different lines of the figure
change their form without changing their length. As a
rule, this flexible and inextensible figure cannot be displaced without leaving the surface. But there are certain
surfaces for which such a movement would be possible.
They are surfaces of constant curvature. If we resume
the comparison that we made just now, and imagine beings without thickness living on one of these surfaces,
they will regard as possible the motion of a figure all
the lines of which remain of a constant length. Such a
movement would appear absurd, on the other hand, to
animals without thickness living on a surface of variable
curvature. These surfaces of constant curvature are of
two kinds. The curvature of some is positive, and they
may be deformed so as to be applied to a sphere. The geometry of these surfaces is therefore reduced to spherical
geometry—namely, Riemann’s. The curvature of others
is negative. Beltrami has shown that the geometry of
these surfaces is identical with that of Lobatschewsky.
Thus the two-dimensional geometries of Riemann and
Lobatschewsky are connected with Euclidean geometry. Beings whose minds
were made as ours, and with senses like ours, but without
any preliminary education, might receive from a suitablychosen external world impressions which would lead them
to construct a geometry other than that of Euclid, and to
localise the phenomena of this external world in a nonEuclidean space, or even in space of four dimensions.
As for us, whose education has been made by our actual world, if we were suddenly transported into this new
world, we should have no difficulty in referring phenomena to our Euclidean space. Perhaps somebody may appear on the scene some day who will devote his life to it,
and be able to represent to himself the fourth dimension. Geometrical Space and Representative Space. It is
often said that the images we form of external objects
are localised in space, and even that they can only be
formed on this condition. It is also said that this space,
which thus serves as a kind of framework ready prepared
for our sensations and representations, is identical with
the space of the geometers, having all the properties of
that space. To all clear-headed men who think in this way, the preceding statement might well appear extraordinary; but it is as well to see if they are not the victims of some illusion which closer analysis may be able
to dissipate. In the first place, what are the properties of
space properly so called? I mean of that space which is
the object of geometry, and which I shall call geometrical
space. The following are some of the more essential:—
1st, it is continuous; 2nd, it is infinite; 3rd, it is of
three dimensions; 4th, it is homogeneous—that is to say,
all its points are identical one with another; 5th, it is
isotropic. Compare this now with the framework of our
representations and sensations, which I may call representative space. First of all let us consider a purely
visual impression, due to an image formed on the back
of the retina. A cursory analysis shows us this image as
continuous, but as possessing only two dimensions, which
already distinguishes purely visual from what may be
called geometrical space. On the other hand, the image
is enclosed within a limited framework; and there is a
no less important difference: this pure visual space is not
homogeneous. All the points on the retina, apart from the
images which may be formed, do not play the same rôle.
The yellow spot can in no way be regarded as identical with a point on the edge of the retina. Not only does the
same object produce on it much brighter impressions, but
in the whole of the limited framework the point which
occupies the centre will not appear identical with a point
near one of the edges. Closer analysis no doubt would
show us that this continuity of visual space and its two
dimensions are but an illusion. It would make visual
space even more different than before from geometrical
space, but we may treat this remark as incidental. 
However, sight enables us to appreciate distance, and
therefore to perceive a third dimension. But every one
knows that this perception of the third dimension reduces
to a sense of the effort of accommodation which must
be made, and to a sense of the convergence of the two
eyes, that must take place in order to perceive an object
distinctly. These are muscular sensations quite different
from the visual sensations which have given us the concept of the two first dimensions. The third dimension will
therefore not appear to us as playing the same rôle as the
two others. What may be called complete visual space is
not therefore an isotropic space. It has, it is true, exactly
three dimensions; which means that the elements of our
visual sensations (those at least which concur in forming
the concept of extension) will be completely defined if we know three of them; or, in mathematical language, they
will be functions of three independent variables. But let
us look at the matter a little closer. The third dimension is revealed to us in two different ways: by the effort
of accommodation, and by the convergence of the eyes.
No doubt these two indications are always in harmony;
there is between them a constant relation; or, in mathematical language, the two variables which measure these
two muscular sensations do not appear to us as independent. Or, again, to avoid an appeal to mathematical ideas
which are already rather too refined, we may go back to
the language of the preceding chapter and enunciate the
same fact as follows:—If two sensations of convergence
A and B are indistinguishable, the two sensations of accommodation A0 and B
0 which accompany them respectively will also be indistinguishable. But that is, so to
speak, an experimental fact. Nothing prevents us à priori from assuming the contrary, and if the contrary takes
place, if these two muscular sensations both vary independently, we must take into account one more independent variable, and complete visual space will appear to
us as a physical continuum of four dimensions. And so in
this there is also a fact of external experiment. Nothing
prevents us from assuming that a being with a mind like ours, with the same sense-organs as ourselves, may be
placed in a world in which light would only reach him after being passed through refracting media of complicated
form. The two indications which enable us to appreciate
distances would cease to be connected by a constant relation. A being educating his senses in such a world would
no doubt attribute four dimensions to complete visual
space.