On the subject of prehistoric mathematics, we may observe in the
first place that, though all early races which have left records behind
them knew something of numeration and mechanics, and though the
majority were also acquainted with the elements of land-surveying, yet
the rules which they possessed were in general founded only on the
results of observation and experiment, and were neither deduced from
nor did they form part of any science. The fact then that various
nations in the vicinity of Greece had reached a high state of civilisation
does not justify us in assuming that they had studied mathematics.
The only races with whom the Greeks of Asia Minor (amongst whom
our history begins) were likely to have come into frequent contact were
those inhabiting the eastern littoral of the Mediterranean; and Greek tradition uniformly assigned the special development of geometry to the
Egyptians, and that of the science of numbers either to the Egyptians
or to the Phoenicians. I discuss these subjects separately.
First, as to the science of numbers. So far as the acquirements of
the Phoenicians on this subject are concerned it is impossible to speak
with certainty. The magnitude of the commercial transactions of Tyre
and Sidon necessitated a considerable development of arithmetic, to
which it is probable the name of science might be properly applied. A
Babylonian table of the numerical value of the squares of a series of
consecutive integers has been found, and this would seem to indicate
that properties of numbers were studied. According to Strabo the Tyrians paid particular attention to the sciences of numbers, navigation,
and astronomy; they had, we know, considerable commerce with their
neighbours and kinsmen the Chaldaeans; and B¨ockh says that they
regularly supplied the weights and measures used in Babylon. Now the
Chaldaeans had certainly paid some attention to arithmetic and geometry, as is shown by their astronomical calculations; and, whatever was
the extent of their attainments in arithmetic, it is almost certain that
the Phoenicians were equally proficient, while it is likely that the knowledge of the latter, such as it was, was communicated to the Greeks. On
the whole it seems probable that the early Greeks were largely indebted
to the Phoenicians for their knowledge of practical arithmetic or the art
of calculation, and perhaps also learnt from them a few properties of
numbers. It may be worthy of note that Pythagoras was a Phoenician;
and according to Herodotus, but this is more doubtful, Thales was also
of that race.

We usually form much too vague an idea of what an equation is, when we give that name to every kind of relation of equality between any two functions of the magnitudes which we are considering. For, though every equation is evidently a relation of equality, it is far from being true that, reciprocally, every relation of equality is a veritable equation, of the kind of those to which, by their nature, the methods of analysis are applicable.

[Pg 47]

This want of precision in the logical consideration of an idea which is so fundamental in mathematics, brings with it the serious inconvenience of rendering it almost impossible to explain, in general terms, the great and fundamental difficulty which we find in establishing the relation between the concrete and the abstract, and which stands out so prominently in each great mathematical question taken by itself. If the meaning of the word equation was truly as extended as we habitually suppose it to be in our definition of it, it is not apparent what great difficulty there could really be, in general, in establishing the equations of any problem whatsoever; for the whole would thus appear to consist in a simple question of form, which ought never even to exact any great intellectual efforts, seeing that we can hardly conceive of any precise relation which is not immediately a certain relation of equality, or which cannot be readily brought thereto by some very easy transformations.

Thus, when we admit every species of functions into the definition of equations, we do not at all account for the extreme difficulty which we almost always experience in putting a problem into an equation, and which so often may be compared to the efforts required by the analytical elaboration of the equation when once obtained. In a word, the ordinary abstract and general idea of an equation does not at all correspond to the real meaning which geometers attach to that expression in the actual development of the science. Here, then, is a logical fault, a defect of correlation, which it is very important to rectify.

Division of Functions into Abstract and Concrete. To succeed in doing so, I begin by distinguishing two[Pg 48] sorts of functions, abstract or analytical functions, and concrete functions. The first alone can enter into veritable equations. We may, therefore, henceforth define every equation, in an exact and sufficiently profound manner, as a relation of equality between two abstract functions of the magnitudes under consideration. In order not to have to return again to this fundamental definition, I must add here, as an indispensable complement, without which the idea would not be sufficiently general, that these abstract functions may refer not only to the magnitudes which the problem presents of itself, but also to all the other auxiliary magnitudes which are connected with it, and which we will often be able to introduce, simply as a mathematical artifice, with the sole object of facilitating the discovery of the equations of the phenomena. I here anticipate summarily the result of a general discussion of the highest importance, which will be found at the end of this chapter. We will now return to the essential distinction of functions as abstract and concrete.

This distinction may be established in two ways, essentially different, but complementary of each other, à priori and à posteriori; that is to say, by characterizing in a general manner the peculiar nature of each species of functions, and then by making the actual enumeration of all the abstract functions at present known, at least so far as relates to the elements of which they are composed.

À priori, the functions which I call abstract are those which express a manner of dependence between magnitudes, which can be conceived between numbers alone, without there being need of indicating any phenomenon[Pg 49] whatever in which it is realized. I name, on the other hand, concrete functions, those for which the mode of dependence expressed cannot be defined or conceived except by assigning a determinate case of physics, geometry, mechanics, &c., in which it actually exists.

Most functions in their origin, even those which are at present the most purely abstract, have begun by being concrete; so that it is easy to make the preceding distinction understood, by citing only the successive different points of view under which, in proportion as the science has become formed, geometers have considered the most simple analytical functions. I will indicate powers, for example, which have in general become abstract functions only since the labours of Vieta and Descartes. The functions x2, x3, which in our present analysis are so well conceived as simply abstract, were, for the geometers of antiquity, perfectly concrete functions, expressing the relation of the superficies of a square, or the volume of a cube to the length of their side. These had in their eyes such a character so exclusively, that it was only by means of the geometrical definitions that they discovered the elementary algebraic properties of these functions, relating to the decomposition of the variable into two parts, properties which were at that epoch only real theorems of geometry, to which a numerical meaning was not attached until long afterward.

I shall have occasion to cite presently, for another reason, a new example, very suitable to make apparent the fundamental distinction which I have just exhibited; it is that of circular functions, both direct and inverse, which at the present time are still sometimes concrete, sometimes[Pg 50] abstract, according to the point of view under which they are regarded.

À posteriori, the general character which renders a function abstract or concrete having been established, the question as to whether a certain determinate function is veritably abstract, and therefore susceptible of entering into true analytical equations, becomes a simple question of fact, inasmuch as we are going to enumerate all the functions of this species.

Enumeration of Abstract Functions. At first view this enumeration seems impossible, the distinct analytical functions being infinite in number. But when we divide them into simple and compound, the difficulty disappears; for, though the number of the different functions considered in mathematical analysis is really infinite, they are, on the contrary, even at the present day, composed of a very small number of elementary functions, which can be easily assigned, and which are evidently sufficient for deciding the abstract or concrete character of any given function; which will be of the one or the other nature, according as it shall be composed exclusively of these simple abstract functions, or as it shall include others.

We evidently have to consider, for this purpose, only the functions of a single variable, since those relative to several independent variables are constantly, by their nature, more or less compound.

Let x be the independent variable, y the correlative variable which depends upon it. The different simple modes of abstract dependence, which we can now conceive between y and x, are expressed by the ten following elementary formulas, in which each function is coupled[Pg 51] with its inverse, that is, with that which would be obtained from the direct function by referring x to y, instead of referring y to x.

The preceding explanations determine with precision the true object and the real field of abstract mathematics. I must now pass to the examination of its principal divisions, for thus far we have considered the calculus as a whole.

The first direct consideration to be presented on the composition of the science of the calculus consists in dividing it, in the first place, into two principal branches, to which, for want of more suitable denominations, I will give the names of Algebraic calculus, or Algebra, and of[Pg 54] Arithmetical calculus, or Arithmetic; but with the caution to take these two expressions in their most extended logical acceptation, in the place of the by far too restricted meaning which is usually attached to them.

The complete solution of every question of the calculus, from the most elementary up to the most transcendental, is necessarily composed of two successive parts, whose nature is essentially distinct. In the first, the object is to transform the proposed equations, so as to make apparent the manner in which the unknown quantities are formed by the known ones: it is this which constitutes the algebraic question. In the second, our object is to find the values of the formulas thus obtained; that is, to determine directly the values of the numbers sought, which are already represented by certain explicit functions of given numbers: this is the arithmetical question.[4] It is apparent that, in every solution which is [Pg 55]truly rational, it necessarily follows the algebraical question, of which it forms the indispensable complement, since it is evidently necessary to know the mode of generation of the numbers sought for before determining their actual values for each particular case. Thus the stopping-place of the algebraic part of the solution becomes the starting point of the arithmetical part.

We thus see that the algebraic calculus and the arithmetical calculus differ essentially in their object. They differ no less in the point of view under which they regard quantities; which are considered in the first as to their relations, and in the second as to their values. The true spirit of the calculus, in general, requires this distinction to be maintained with the most severe exactitude, and the line of demarcation between the two periods of the solution to be rendered as clear and distinct as the proposed question permits. The attentive observation of this precept, which is too much neglected, may be of much assistance, in each particular question, in directing the efforts of our mind, at any moment of the solution, towards the real corresponding difficulty. In truth, the imperfection of the science of the calculus obliges us very often (as will be explained in the next chapter) to intermingle algebraic and arithmetical considerations in the solution of the same question. But, however impossible it may be to separate clearly the two parts of the labour, yet the preceding indications will always enable us to avoid confounding them.

In endeavouring to sum up as succinctly as possible the distinction just established, we see that Algebra may be defined, in general, as having for its object the resolution of equations; taking this expression in its[Pg 56] full logical meaning, which signifies the transformation of implicit functions into equivalent explicit ones. In the same way, Arithmetic may be defined as destined to the determination of the values of functions. Henceforth, therefore, we will briefly say that Algebra is the Calculus of Functions, and Arithmetic the Calculus of Values.

We can now perceive how insufficient and even erroneous are the ordinary definitions. Most generally, the exaggerated importance attributed to Signs has led to the distinguishing the two fundamental branches of the science of the Calculus by the manner of designating in each the subjects of discussion, an idea which is evidently absurd in principle and false in fact. Even the celebrated definition given by Newton, characterizing Algebra as Universal Arithmetic, gives certainly a very false idea of the nature of algebra and of that of arithmetic.[5]

Having thus established the fundamental division of the calculus into two principal branches, I have now to compare in general terms the extent, the importance, and the difficulty of these two sorts of calculus, so as to have hereafter to consider only the Calculus of Functions, which is to be the principal subject of our study.

Its Extent. The Calculus of Values, or Arithmetic, would appear, at first view, to present a field as vast as that of algebra, since it would seem to admit as many distinct questions as we can conceive different algebraic formulas whose values are to be determined. But a very simple reflection will show the difference. Dividing functions into simple and compound, it is evident that when we know how to determine the value of simple functions, the consideration of compound functions will no longer present any difficulty. In the algebraic point of view, a compound function plays a very different part from that of the elementary functions of which it consists, and from this, indeed, proceed all the principal difficulties of analysis. But it is very different with the Arithmetical Calculus. Thus the number of truly distinct arithmetical operations is only that determined by the number of the elementary abstract functions, the very limited list of which has been given above. The determination of the values of these ten functions necessarily gives that of all the functions, infinite in number, which are considered in the whole of mathematical analysis, such at least as it exists at present. There can be no new arithmetical operations without the creation of really new analytical elements, the number of which must always be extremely small. The field of arithmetic is, then, by its nature, exceedingly restricted, while that of algebra is rigorously indefinite.

It is, however, important to remark, that the domain of the calculus of values is, in reality, much more extensive than it is commonly represented; for several questions[Pg 58] truly arithmetical, since they consist of determinations of values, are not ordinarily classed as such, because we are accustomed to treat them only as incidental in the midst of a body of analytical researches more or less elevated, the too high opinion commonly formed of the influence of signs being again the principal cause of this confusion of ideas. Thus not only the construction of a table of logarithms, but also the calculation of trigonometrical tables, are true arithmetical operations of a higher kind. We may also cite as being in the same class, although in a very distinct and more elevated order, all the methods by which we determine directly the value of any function for each particular system of values attributed to the quantities on which it depends, when we cannot express in general terms the explicit form of that function. In this point of view the numerical solution of questions which we cannot resolve algebraically, and even the calculation of "Definite Integrals," whose general integrals we do not know, really make a part, in spite of all appearances, of the domain of arithmetic, in which we must necessarily comprise all that which has for its object the determination of the values of functions. The considerations relative to this object are, in fact, constantly homogeneous, whatever the determinations in question, and are always very distinct from truly algebraic considerations.

To complete a just idea of the real extent of the calculus of values, we must include in it likewise that part of the general science of the calculus which now bears the name of the Theory of Numbers, and which is yet so little advanced. This branch, very extensive by its nature, but whose importance in the general system of[Pg 59] science is not very great, has for its object the discovery of the properties inherent in different numbers by virtue of their values, and independent of any particular system of numeration. It forms, then, a sort of transcendental arithmetic; and to it would really apply the definition proposed by Newton for algebra.

The entire domain of arithmetic is, then, much more extended than is commonly supposed; but this calculus of values will still never be more than a point, so to speak, in comparison with the calculus of functions, of which mathematical science essentially consists. This comparative estimate will be still more apparent from some considerations which I have now to indicate respecting the true nature of arithmetical questions in general, when they are more profoundly examined.

Its true Nature. In seeking to determine with precision in what determinations of values properly consist, we easily recognize that they are nothing else but veritable transformations of the functions to be valued; transformations which, in spite of their special end, are none the less essentially of the same nature as all those taught by analysis. In this point of view, the calculus of values might be simply conceived as an appendix, and a particular application of the calculus of functions, so that arithmetic would disappear, so to say, as a distinct section in the whole body of abstract mathematics.

In order thoroughly to comprehend this consideration, we must observe that, when we propose to determine the value of an unknown number whose mode of formation is given, it is, by the mere enunciation of the arithmetical question, already defined and expressed under a certain form; and that in determining its value we only put its[Pg 60] expression under another determinate form, to which we are accustomed to refer the exact notion of each particular number by making it re-enter into the regular system of numeration. The determination of values consists so completely of a simple transformation, that when the primitive expression of the number is found to be already conformed to the regular system of numeration, there is no longer any determination of value, properly speaking, or, rather, the question is answered by the question itself. Let the question be to add the two numbers one and twenty, we answer it by merely repeating the enunciation of the question,[6] and nevertheless we think that we have determined the value of the sum. This signifies that in this case the first expression of the function had no need of being transformed, while it would not be thus in adding twenty-three and fourteen, for then the sum would not be immediately expressed in a manner conformed to the rank which it occupies in the fixed and general scale of numeration.

To sum up as comprehensively as possible the preceding views, we may say, that to determine the value of a number is nothing else than putting its primitive expression under the form

a + bz + cz2 + dz3 + ez4 . . . . . + pzm,
z being generally equal to 10, and the coefficients a, b, c, d, &c., being subjected to the conditions of being whole numbers less than z; capable of becoming equal to zero; but never negative. Every arithmetical question may thus be stated as consisting in putting under such a form [Pg 61]any abstract function whatever of different quantities, which are supposed to have themselves a similar form already. We might then see in the different operations of arithmetic only simple particular cases of certain algebraic transformations, excepting the special difficulties belonging to conditions relating to the nature of the coefficients.

It clearly follows that abstract mathematics is essentially composed of the Calculus of Functions, which had been already seen to be its most important, most extended, and most difficult part. It will henceforth be the exclusive subject of our analytical investigations. I will therefore no longer delay on the Calculus of Values, but pass immediately to the examination of the fundamental division of the Calculus of Functions.
